NEW DELHI: Indicating its reluctance to consider the aspect of cancellation of bail granted to three student activists in a case of north-east Delhi riots, the Supreme Court on Thursday also termed as troubling that bail petitions are being argued at length debating the provisons of law.
A bench of Justices S K Kaul and Hemant Gupta, which was hearing the appeals filed by police against the Delhi high court judgements granting bail to three students, asked whether the police was aggrieved by grant of bail or interpretation and observations in the verdicts.
Solicitor General Tushar Mehta, appearing for the police, said they are aggrieved on both the issues and they would try to convince the apex court on these aspects.
“Very unlikely, but you can try,” the bench told Mehta, indicating its reservation to go into the aspect of cancellation of bail of the three accused who were booked under stringent anti-terror law -- Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA).

The top court observed that bail matters are argued at length before the courts despite the fact that time is limited now a days and it proposes to hear these appeals for not more than a couple of hours.
“This is something which is troubling us many times. Every bail matter is argued at length before the trial courts, high courts and this court,” the bench said, adding, “The provisions of Act are not to be debated in a bail matter”.
The bench, which posted the matter for hearing after four weeks, observed that bail matters are not in the nature of final adjudicatory proceedings and a prima facie call has to be taken whether bail is to be granted or not.
The apex court was hearing the appeals filed by Delhi Police challenging the high court June 15 verdicts granting bail to JNU students Natasha Narwal and Devangana Kalita and Jamia Millia Islamia University student Asif Iqbal Tanha in the case relating to last year's communal violence in north-east Delhi during protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA).
At the outset, senior advocate Kapil Sibal, appearing for the students, said they were seeking some time as the chargesheet runs into 20,000 pages.
“We don't have wherewithal to print 20,000 pages. Please allow us to file it in pen drive,” he said.
The bench, which allowed Sibal's request to file the pen drive on record, asked Mehta if the grievance of police is regarding grant of bail by the high court or the interpretation on law given in the matter.
“Both. It will have to be argued,” the solicitor general said.
The bench then asked whether the police want these students, who are out on bail, to be in custody.
“We will argue,” Mehta said.
The bench said that prima facie in bail matter, may be all these things need not be examined and ultimately, these are observations of the high court in context of bail only.
“Your lordships observations will go a long way too,” Mehta said.
The bench observed that one is the issue of bail and the other is that in a bail proceeding, lots of observations have been made.
Mehta said that this is not a “political matter”.
At this, Justice Kaul observed “don't make me lose my patience. Am I precluded from asking any question? You are making us say all this. You are not letting me speak. I am trying to segregate the case,”
The bench told Mehta, “Please don't presume that we are against you. We only want to segregate the issue”.
Additional Solicitor General Aman Lekhi, who also appeared for the police, said the issue is regarding applicability of section 15 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA).
The apex court had on June 18 expressed its displeasure over the high court discussing the entire anti-terror law UAPA in a bail matter and made it clear that the judgements shall not be treated as a precedent and may not be relied upon by any of the parties in any of the proceedings.
The top court, which had agreed to hear the appeals filed by police and issued notices to these three students, had refused to stay the high court verdicts.
The apex court had clarified in its June 18 order that release of these students on bail was not being interfered with at this stage.
While hearing the matter last month, the top court had taken note of Mehta's submission that the entire UAPA has been "turned upside down" by the high court in granting bail in the case and observed that the issue is important and can have pan-India ramifications.
Mehta had said that 53 people died and over 700 were injured during the riots which took place at a time when the then US president and other dignitaries were here.
The high court had said although the definition of ‘terrorist act' in section 15 of the UAPA is wide and somewhat vague, it must partake the essential character of terrorism and the phrase ‘terrorist act' cannot be permitted to be applied in a “cavalier manner” to criminal acts that squarely fall under the Indian Penal Code.
The Delhi Police has assailed the verdict, saying the interpretation of high court would weaken the prosecution in terror cases.
The high court had on June 15 granted bail to the three student activists saying in an anxiety to suppress dissent the State has blurred the line between right to protest and terrorist activity and if such a mindset gains traction, it would be a "sad day for democracy".
These three student activists were released from jail on June 17.
Kalita, Narwal and Tanha are accused in four, three and two cases respectively relating to communal riots that broke out on February 24 last year.

NOIDA: In January last year, a few months short of his 18th birthday, a 17-year-old boy had showed up near Jamia Millia Islamia with a gun and fired at Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) protesters.
He was booked for attempt to murder and under sections of the Arms Act, but since he was a minor, he was taken into protective custody.
Sources said the boy was later given bail after an assurance from him and his family that he was “repentant” and had been “misled”. But the path he has taken since he attained freedom doesn’t suggest so.
Last week, at a mahapanchayat in Pataudi, he called for attacks on the Muslim community. Since then, the pseudonym he uses has trended as a social media hashtag.

The rabid espousal of hatred has almost been uniformly denounced or disowned across the ideological divide of political opinion. But it doesn’t seem to have mattered for the 19-year-old. In a video doing the rounds of Twitter, the boy says he stands by his words. And repeats them. A support hashtag has trended on cue.
A ‘fan page’ on Instagram gives glimpses into a life very different from that of the Class XI student who had set out from his house in a Gautam Budh Nagar village on January 30 last year and shot into infamy.
The boy is seen among cars, strutting to background scores and seated behind an office desk. The latest posts are screenshots that show him trending above the coronavirus’s kappa variant and promotions of Farhan Akhtar’s latest film.
That’s not, however, attestation of an organic popularity of his opinion – another post specifies the date and time to ‘supporters’ to tweet in his favour (a video purportedly featuring the boy had also surfaced on social media in which he is heard saying his social media accounts have been banned, an arrest hashtag was trending on Twitter, and that his “followers” should respond by turning the support hashtag into a trend).
His fanatic views, allegedly aired in several mediums, are also recorded on the fan page as is a note alleging police denial of permission for a proposed march to West Bengal ahead of the assembly polls there earlier this year. One post marking a year of the Jamia shooting -- which took place on Martyrs Day (January 30) -- describes the boy as the second Nathuram Godse.
“He is into netagiri now. Elders too support him,” said Satish, who lives in the same neighbourhood as the boy. The boy’s family stresses its distance from him, claiming he no longer lives with them and is an infrequent visitor. In a video on social media, however, the boy is seen wearing a garland as he is welcomed to the village. In the crowd are both neighbours and relatives.
The boy’s grandfather confirmed to TOI he was out on bail and had even enrolled in a BA programme at an open university.
“He studies at the Ghaziabad centre of the university. He is inter pass. He comes home sometimes,” he says. His father, however, said the boy had been mostly staying in Delhi and elsewhere and did not discuss his whereabouts with him. The family, he insisted, had “no links” with him.
Local youths, however, keep regular track of him on social media and WhatsApp groups.
“He is very active on social media. He had gone to Rajasthan and uploaded a video on Instagram about it,” said Satish. While local outfits, including the Bajrang Dal unit, denied any association with him, youths in the area said he had patronage. “He seems to be only into Bajrang Dal. He is the main person here,” said a local resident, who declined to be named. On WhatsApp groups that connect local Bajrang Dal supporters, videos of the boy are widely shared.
Lalit Sharma, Gautam Budh Nagar president of Bajrang Dal, told TOI that the outfit does not support anyone who violates the Constitution.
“Ever since the BJP government has come to office, there are so many youths who use the flags of our outfits without knowing anything about the outfits,” he said.
The boy’s cousin is a mandal secretary of BJP in Gautam Budh Nagar. He told TOI that the boy has no connection with the party.
“We have tried to explain to him many times, but his thoughts have become completely ‘Hindutvawadi’ and he remains involved in those activities only,” he said.

NEW DELHI: A court here is scheduled to pronounce judgment on Tuesday in a case related to the 2020 northeast Delhi riots in which a man was charged for rioting, dacoity, and being part of an unlawful assembly. According to the police, accused Suresh, along with a huge crowd of rioters carrying iron rods and sticks, allegedly broke open the lock of a shop situated in Delhi's Babarpur Road and looted it on February 25 evening.
Additional Sessions Judge Amitabh Rawat had reserved the order on April 21 and since then the verdict has been deferred seven times.
On March 9, 2021, the court had framed charges against Suresh under Sections 143 (punishment for being a member of an unlawful assembly), 147 (punishment for rioting), 427 (mischief causing damage) of the Indian Penal Code.
He was also charged under Section 454 (house-trespass) read with Section 149 (member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common object) and 395 (punishment for dacoity) of the Indian Penal Code to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.

The shop belonged to one Bhagat Singh and was rented to Asif, who is the complainant in the case.
During the investigation, Singh told the police that the "rioters were aggressive and wanted to loot the said shop because it was of a Muslim and he tried to stop them but in vain."
Communal clashes had broken out in northeast Delhi in February 2020, after violence between the Citizenship (Amendment) Act supporters and its protesters spiraled out of control leaving at least 53 people dead and over 700 injured.

GUWAHATI: Assam legislator Akhil Gogoi on Thursday walked free after more than a year-and-a-half in captivity as a special NIA court cleared him of all charges under UAPA for his alleged role in the violent anti-CAA stir in the state in December 2019.
Gogoi, an Independent MLA from Sivasagar constituency, walked out of the Gauhati Medical College and Hospital, where he was being treated for various ailments, after the special NIA court sent the release order to the Guwahati Central Jail.
"Truth has finally prevailed, though no efforts were spared to keep me behind the bars," the Raijor Dal chief told reporters after his release.
Gogoi said that after keeping his bag at home, he will visit the parents of "first CAA martyr" Sam Stafford at their residence in Hatigaon area of Guwahati.
"From there, I will visit the offices of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti and Raijor Dal today. I leave for my constituency Sivasagar tomorrow early in the morning and thank people for electing me while I was in prison," he said.
Gogoi and his associates were accused in two cases under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act for their alleged role in violent protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in Assam in December 2019.
The NIA court has cleared all of them of the charges in the two cases.

RAMPUR: Two years after an anti-CAA (Citizenship Amendment Act) protest in Rampur turned violent, the UP police has invoked the Goondas Act against 67 people who were allegedly part of the demonstration in 2019.
At the beginning of this month, additional district magistrate Ram Bharat Tiwari started serving notices under the Act to the protesters. Rampur superintendent of police Shagun Gautam told TOI that the Act has been invoked against 67 offenders so far and more notices were underway.
A 27-year-old man, Faiz Khan, had died while five people and a dozen policemen had sustained injuries after violence erupted at a protest against CAA in Rampur on December 21, 2019 near Hathikhana square. The crowd was dispersed after police resorted to firing tear gas and rubber bullets at the protesters. Many of the protesters had been arrested and sent to jail.
“About 200 protesters had been arrested for the violence back then and we have named 142 in our chargesheet. We have invoked the Goondas Act against those who took part in the violence and sent a report to the court of the district magistrate. Investigation is still on and more protesters will be served notices,” he said.

Three separate FIRs had been registered after the incident. Police said they went through video footage and photographs to identify protesters and booked them under several sections of the IPC, including murder, attempt to murder and rioting.
The protesters now served notices have been given 15 days to submit replies to the court, said the additional district magistrate. “If they are found guilty, they will have to stay away from the district for six months under the provisions of the Act,” Tiwari told TOI.
Muhammad Rehman Ali, the counsel who will appear before the ADM’s court on behalf of the anti-CAA protesters, said that majority of those served notices were labourers, daily wagers and embroidery workers. “They don’t have any criminal history and are innocent. We will challenge the notices after submitting appropriate replies to the court,” he said.
Among those served notices was 24-year-old daily wager Sonu (who only uses his first name). “I was not part of the protest but was picked up in 2019. I stayed in jail for nearly two months before I could manage to get bail. I’m already fighting a court case and this notice has added to my worries. I earn Rs 3,000 a month and I can’t afford legal fees,” he said.

NEW DELHI: The Delhi high court on Monday refused to hear student activist Gulfisha Fatima's plea against her alleged illegal detention in a Delhi riots case after it took a strong exception to her advocate Mehmood Pracha's taking recourse to "heckling" and placing reliance on facts that were not on record. A bench of Justice Siddharth Mridul and Justice Anup Jairam Bhambhani directed that the petition be placed before another bench on Friday.
"Instead of addressing us on merits, Mr Pracha is taking recourse to heckling and seeking to take recourse to facts not in the petition. List before another Bench..," the court said.
"We refuse to be addressed by someone who does not know the basics of law," it remarked.
In the habeas corpus petition, Fatima claimed that her custody in a Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA) case relating to alleged larger conspiracy that led to the north-east Delhi riots was illegal and she should thus be released.

Delhi police advocate Amit Mahajan told the court that a habeas corpus petition preferred by Fatima's brother on the same relief was dismissed by the high court last year and the present petition was thus not maintainable.
Pracha informed the court that an appeal against it before the Supreme Court was withdrawn with liberty to approach the high court.
Calling the present petition a "second salvo on same relief", the court questioned its maintainability and asked Pracha to take recourse to the remedy available in law.
"On the same facts and circumstances, we can't open this judgement. Tell the trial court that. You can't keep filing fresh habeas corpus... We are not saying you don't have a remedy. When it is not maintainable, it is not maintainable. You can't jump the gun and come here."
Pracha submitted that Fatima was in continued illegal detention and as per a Supreme Court decision, only a special court under NIA Act, and not a sessions court, had the power to extend remand.
As the court stated that once there is a remand order - whether right or wrong - it cannot be set aside in a habeas corpus proceedings, Pracha went on to allege that as of date, there was no remand order in the present case.
Pracha urged the court to take his statement on record after the court said that the same was not part of the pleadings in the case.
The court, however, responded, "You are not addressing a rally. You are addressing a court. Show us from your pleadings... File an affidavit to say there is no remand order today. You can't argue statement of facts at the Bar."
In response to the petition, the police had said the habeas corpus petition filed by Fatima is not maintainable and it is nothing but a blatant abuse of the process of law and deserves to the dismissed with cost.
The response filed by advocates Mahajan and Rajat Nair, representing Delhi Police, claimed that the plea filed by the woman was false, frivolous and vexatious and also abuse and misuse of the process of law.
Asserting that the petition is not maintainable, the police reply stated that on September 16, 2020, the charge sheet was filed before the trial court against Fatima and other accused and cognisance was taken the next day and the woman is in judicial custody pursuant to the trial court's order, therefore, her detention in judicial custody is legal and valid.
Communal clashes had broken out in north-east Delhi on February 24, 2020 after violence between the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) supporters and protesters spiralled out of control leaving at least 53 people dead and over 700 injured.
Fatima was arrested in the case on April 11 and is currently under judicial custody. ADS SA

GUWAHATI: Sibsagar legislator Akhil Gogoi, who spent 18 months in captivity from December 2019 - when the movement against Citizenship Amendment Act was in its prime - on Friday said the agitation against the CAA will be started again as he will fight the implementation of the Act.
"Now that I am out, I want to assure the people that the anti-CAA movement will resume. No illegal foreigner will be allowed to stay in the state," he told reporters at Nagaon on the way to his constituency Sibsagar, a day after he was released from jail.
He said he will not stop agitating as he has become the MLA to strengthen his movement for safeguarding Assam.
"I will continue to raise the issues inside the assembly, if any solution doesn't come ..we will start statewide agitation for Assam. I will raise the issues of big dams and toll gates in the assembly. If the government fails to give a proper response, we will have to take the path of agitation. For Assam, I will fight hard so that it does not become another Uttar Pradesh. We want Assam to be secular and democratic," Gogoi added.
Gogoi, who fought and won the recently-concluded assembly elections from jail, said the government has failed to control the inflation. "I will not remain silent. I warn the government to check corruption and price rise. I will work to provide relief to Covid-hit vendors, cab drivers, artistes, farmers and other marginalized people who have been hit hard during the lockdown," he added.

NEW DELHI: The Centre on Monday told the Supreme Court that its notification of May 28 delegating powers to collectors of some of districts to grant citizenship to members of the minority community from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh was not related to the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and that such exercise had been done earlier too since 2006.
Responding to the allegation of the Indian Union of Muslim League, which filed an application against the notification in a case pending in SC on the constitutional validity of CAA, the government said its notification is part of an administrative decision to decentralise the decision-making process for speedy disposal of citizenship applications and is not in any way related to CAA.
“It is submitted that the notification seeks to merely delegate the power of the central government to the local authorities in particular cases. The said notification does not provide for any relaxations to the foreigners and applies only to foreigners who have entered the country legally. The central government used its authority under Section 16 of the Citizenship Act and delegated its powers to grant citizenship by registration or naturalisation to district collectors. 
It is submitted that it is merely an administrative delegation of power without any specific classification or relaxation,” said the Centre’s affidavit.
By the notification, the Centre has delegated power to grant citizenship in such cases to the collectors of 13 more districts — Morbi, Rajkot, Patan and Vadodara in Gujarat; Jalore, Udaipur, Pali, Barmer and Sirohi in Rajasthan; Durg and Balodabazar in Chhattisgarh; Faridabad in Haryana; and Jalandhar in Punjab and to the home secretaries of Haryana and Punjab. Now, district collectors of 29 districts and home secretaries of 9 states can exercise such powers. “It is further 
submitted that the existing law and procedure for acquiring citizenship of India is in no way sought to be amended through the impugned notification,” the government said.

NEW DELHI: The controversy surrounding the contentious citizenship law enacted in 2019 has undoubtedly been one of the biggest challenges faced by the Narendra Modi government during its second term.
Months after assuming office on May 30, the Modi government introduced the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill in Parliament amid a massive backlash from the opposition parties.
Despite stiff opposition, the government managed to get the bill cleared in both Houses of Parliament. It became a law in December 2019 after President Ram Nath Kovind's assent.
The Citizenship (Amendment) Act grants citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Parsis, Buddhists and Christians fleeing religious persecution from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh and who came to India on or before December 31, 2014. The law, however, excludes Muslims.
What makes the law even more controversial is when it is seen in conjunction with the proposed National Register of Citizens (NRC). The government had said it will extend the NRC activity, an exercise hitherto specific to Assam, to the rest of the country.
Moreover, Union home minister Amit Shah's statement that we must "understand the chronology" of CAA and NRC sparked fears.
Many feared that this would result in people from the minority community losing their citizenship status in case they are unable to prove their residential status and sent to detention centres.
The government tried to quell these fears and denied any link between the CAA and NRC. But it was too late.
The issue sparked off massive anti-CAA protests across the country, with some even taking a violent turn.
But it was the months-long Shaheen Bagh protest in the national capital that hogged the national spotlight.
What started as a sit-in protest by a group of around 100 residents turned into one of the largest campsites for anti-CAA protests. For 101 days, hundreds of anti-CAA protesters led by local women blocked a major road at Shaheen Bagh.
It was cleared only the day before nationwide lockdown was imposed in March 2020 to contain Covid-19 spread.
The opposition parties also staged demonstrations demanding a roll back of the legislation, saying that CAA discriminates on religious lines. They alleged that the CAA, along with NRC, intends to target India’s Muslim community and threatens the social fabric of the nation.
The government put up a staunch defence of the law with Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union home minister Amit Shah taking the lead.
PM Modi said that his government introduced the CAA to correct "historical" injustices and recalled the Nehru-Liaquat pact to assert that the law fulfills India's "old promise" to religious minorities in neighbouring countries.
Meanwhile, the rules to the CAA – guidelines on how the legislation will be implemented – are yet to be notified by the Centre.
The pandemic has forced the government put the implementation of CAA on hold. However, activist groups have warned that if the government proceeds with the implementation of CAA-NRC, the protesters will hit the streets again.
At least 10 non-BJP states have passed a resolution against the law and have urged the Union government to revoke it.
The government had recently told Rajya Sabha that it is yet to take a call on the nationwide NRC. With efforts directed at handling the pandemic, the issue has been put into cold storage for now. It remains to be seen whether it takes centrestage again during the remainder of Modi government's second term.

NEW DELHI: The Indian Union Muslim League (IUML) has moved the Supreme Court challenging the Centre's notification inviting non-Muslims belonging to Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan and residing in 13 districts in Gujarat, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Haryana and Punjab to apply for Indian citizenship.
The interim application argued that the Centre is trying to circumvent the assurance given to the apex court in this regard in the pending petition filed by the IUML challenging the constitutional validity of the provisions of the the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), 2019.
It said that the Centre provided assurance that staying of the Amendment Act was not necessary since the rules of the Amendment Act had not been framed.
The CAA grants Indian citizenship to non-Muslim minorities -- Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian -- who migrated to India from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh till December 31, 2014, following persecution over their faith.
The fresh plea said the Union home ministry on Friday issued a notification to this effect for immediate implementation of the order under the Citizenship Act 1955 and Rules framed under the law in 2009 even though the rules under the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) enacted in 2019 are yet to be framed by the MHA is manifestly illegal and runs counter to the provisions of the Act.
IUML in its plea before the top court said that the Centre had, during the course of the hearing of its plea challenging the constitutional validity of CAA, submitted before the apex court and provided assurance that staying of the Amendment Act was not necessary since the rules of the Amendment Act had not been framed.
"However, the Respondent Union, in a roundabout way, and in an attempt to circumvent the assurance given to this Court, have sought to implement their malafide designs envisaged under the Amendment Act through the recently issued order dated May 28," the plea said.
IUML submitted that if the Centre's notification is implemented and citizenship is given to persons on the basis of their religion, and, thereafter, if this Court strikes down the Amendment Act and rules, whereby the act of providing citizenship on the basis of religion is declared void.
"Then, to take back the citizenship of these persons, granted pursuant to the present Order, will be a herculean task and would be near impossible to implement. In the event the said exercise is conducted, it would render the entire batch of writ petitions (challenging CAA) as infructuous," the plea said.
The petition has sought directions to the Centre to stay any further proceedings pursuant to the May 28 order issued by the Union of India, ministry of home affairs till such time the plea challenging CAA is pending.
"In exercise of powers conferred under Section 16 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955), the central government hereby directs that powers exercisable by it for registration as citizen of India under Section 5, or for grant of certificate of naturalisation under section 6 of the Citizenship Act 1955 in respect of any person belonging to minority community in Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan namely, Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians, residing in the districts mentioned and the states mentioned below....," the home ministry notification said
The apex court in February 2020 sought response of the Centre on a batch of fresh pleas challenging the constitutional validity of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act.
The top court, on December 18, 2019 had decided to examine the constitutional validity of the CAA while refusing to stay its operation.
While hearing a batch of petitions, the top court had on January 22, 2020 made it clear that the operation of CAA will not be stayed and gave the government four weeks to respond to the pleas challenging the CAA.
When the CAA was enacted in 2019, there were widespread protests in different parts of the country and even riots took place in Delhi in early 2020 in the wake of these protests.

