Guwahati: Student body All Assam Students’ Union (AASU)’s chief adviser Samujjal Kumar Bhattacharya on Thursday said that he is not afraid of being targeted by Pegasus phone surveillance and his struggle against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act will continue.
In its series of expose on the alleged Pegasus phone spying scandal, The Wire news portal published its latest article on Wednesday stating that phone numbers of two prominent Assamese personalities also figured in the list of around 50,000 numbers worldwide.
Bhattacharya and ULFA (pro-talk faction) general secretary Anup Chetia’s numbers are part of the list, which was exposed and analysed by a global alliance of media publications.
A day after his name popped up in the spying controversy, Bhattacharya expressed surprise and shock, and termed the entire act of putting scores of Indian citizens under surveillance as “anti-national”.
“In this situation, if it is thought that we will be scared with taping of our phones, it is wrong. We will not be afraid. If it is thought that we will not continue with our non-violent struggle to protect the interests of the indigenous people of Northeast, that will not happen.
“Our zeal to fight for our rights will continue, nobody can stop us. We are working for protection of the interests of the indigenous people of the Northeast. Our high command is the people of the region. We are working under the guardianship of the people,” Bhattacharya told PTI in an interview.
He said that whatever he or his colleagues talk over phone, everything is transparent and they say the same thing to the people and the media, and there is nothing to hide.
The AASU leader asserted that the core issue is very clear and it is the influx of illegal foreigners, which is a threat to the identity of the indigenous people of Assam and the Northeastern region.
“Assam Agitation took place because of this and the Assam Accord was signed. But it has not been implemented and the situation became more grave. Northeast was becoming a dumping ground with the imposition of Citizenship (Amendment) Act,” he added.
The CAA is a violation of the Assam Accord and it is “anti-Constitution, communal, anti-indigenous and anti-Northeast”, Bhattacharya said.
A six-year agitation demanding identification and deportation of illegal immigrants was launched by the AASU in 1979. It had culminated in the signing of the Assam Accord on August 15, 1985 in the presence of the then prime minister Rajiv Gandhi.
“That is why the anti-CAA movement in the Northeast was very strong. Our method of the movement was different from other parts of the country and it was non-violent. It will continue,” he added.
The CAA seeks to provide Indian citizenship to Hindus, Jains, Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists and Parsis entering India on or before December 31, 2014 from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan after five years of residence here.
Talking about the Clause 6 of the Assam Accord, Bhattacharya said the Constitutional safeguard has to be given to the indigenous people of the state.
As per Clause 6 of the Assam Accord, Constitutional, legislative and administrative safeguards, as may be appropriate, shall be provided to protect, preserve and promote the culture, social, linguistic identity and heritage of the Assamese people. The bone of contention since the signing of the Accord in 1985 has been the definition of the Assamese people.
“That is why a high-powered committee was formed by the Central government. It submitted its report more than a year ago. The Centre had given an assurance to implement it in letter and spirit, but nothing has been done yet,” he said.
On the Pegasus controversy, Bhattacharya said, “Israel is a foreign nation. A foreign nation taking permission of Indian government and spying on Indian citizens, this is just the murder of democracy. It is a dangerous and fascist attack on privacy, against the Constitution and an anti-India act.”
About the Indian government’s continuous denial of the snooping act, he said if it was done without the knowledge of the Centre, it is more dangerous.
“Then the offices of the prime minister, home minister, defence minister, our internal security – everything can be under surveillance. It is a threat to the integrity, sovereignty and internal security of the country. It is basically a serious threat to the country,” Bhattacharya said.
The AASU leader also appealed to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union home minister Amit Shah to tell the truth to the people of the nation whether the surveillance has the government’s sanction or it is being done by a foreign nation without its knowledge.
Chetia, the other person whose number was also found in the Pegasus leaked list, said on Wednesday he was not surprised that his phone was allegedly being tapped.
“It is natural that the security agencies would tap our phones. We have to see our past also. We fought against the state and declared a war against India. However, I don’t know if Pegasus infected my phone or not,” the insurgent leader, who is now part of a dialogue process, said.
Like Bhattacharya, Chetia too was vocal about his opposition to the CAA.
A global media consortium has recently reported that over 300 verified mobile phone numbers, including of two central ministers, over 40 journalists, three opposition leaders besides scores of business persons and activists in India, could have been targeted for hacking using the Israeli spyware Pegasus, which is usually supplied to government agencies.
The Indian government and Israeli surveillance company NSO Group, which sells Pegasus spyware worldwide, have refuted the reports.

New Delhi: A Gurugram court has rejected the bail application of the Jamia shooter, who was arrested by the Haryana police recently after he gave a provocative speech at a mahapanchayat in Pataudi.
Judicial magistrate Mohammed Sageer, in a strongly worded order, said that giving hate speeches has become a ‘fashion’ and that those encouraging sectarian violence are doing more damage to the country than the COVID-19 pandemic.
The young man from Jewar, who was a minor when he shot a crowd of Jamia Millia students who were protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Act in early 2020, was arrested on July 12 after a complaint was filed against his speech at the mahapanchayat.
In the order, the judicial magistrate said that hate speeches go beyond causing distress to individual group members.
“It can have a societal impact. Hate speech lays the groundwork for later, broad attacks on vulnerable [sections] that can range from discrimination, to ostracism, segregation, deportation, violence and, in the most extreme cases, to genocide,” the order records.
Rejecting the argument of the petitioner’s counsel that the man is young and innocent, magistrate Sageer said, “The accused before the court is not a simple innocent young boy knowing nothing rather he is showing that what he has done in past, has now become capable to execute his hatred without any fear and also that he can move the mass[es] to [be] involve[d] in his hatred.”
The court referred to the fact that as per information given by the investigating officer, and admitted to by the counsels for the petitioner, this is the same person who had brandished an illegal weapon and opened fire at students of Jamia.
Though an FIR was registered at the New Friends Colony police station in Delhi at the time, he was a minor at the time. “The concession given by the courts of law due to his minority has not been taken in good sense by this accused. Rather it seems that he has taken the concession in wrong perspective that he can do anything, even to destroy the very fundamental feature of the constitution which we called ‘secularism’ by his hate speech,” the magistrate said.
“He has posed a real threat by his act that he will do whatever he wishes, what will the forces responsible for maintaining law, order and peace would do? He also posed a question to the state and to the courts of law whether it has power to uphold the Rule of Law?” the order says.
Every citizen has a right to express his thoughts but not in a which targets a particular community and while promoting enmity, the order said, noting that during his speech, the accused “can be seen instigating the mob for doing unlawful acts… instigating abduction of girls of a particular community and their forceful conversion”.
“He seems to be very proud of his antecedents. He even instigated to kill persons of a particular community and change slogans in this regard. Slogans and languages used by him, are clearly offensive and aimed to outrage the religious feelings of one particular group and promoting enmity between different groups/ religious community,” the magistrate said.
“Such activities cannot be tolerated in any civilised society. Hate speech based on religion or caste has become fashion nowadays. The police also seems to be helpless of dealing with such incidents. These kinds of activities are actually disturbing the secular fabric of our country and killing the spirit of the Constitution of India,” it says, adding that anyone who is a threat to the peace of the society and particularly to religious harmony cannot be allowed to roam freely.
“Such kind of people are actually disturbing the secular character of our nation and are the biggest impediment [to] nation building … the common man is under constant threat of violence in the name of religion, caste etc,” the order says.
The incident cannot be seen only as a young man’s religious intolerance because it has “far more serious and … dangerous hidden consequences”. If the accused is granted bail, the very existence of communal harmony may be disturbed and a wrong message will be sent that hate speeches are acceptable in society.
“The faith of common man has to be restored that the state is having [a] secular character and not in support of such kind of persons, promoting hatred and enmity in the name of religion, caste etc. It is the time to give a strong message to such anti-social elements who distribute hatred based on religion etc by way of hate speech that the Rule of Law still prevails,” the magistrate said.
Restraining the accused behind bars will send a strong message that India is an inclusive society where people of all faiths will flourish and have mutual respect. The court will also ensure that the rule of law reigns supreme, the order says.
“Our Constitution even gives protection to non citizens of India, then its the duty of the state as well as the judiciary to ensure that citizens of India of any religion or faith or caste should not feel unprotected and that such hate mongers cannot walk freely without any fear,” it says.
People like the accused are more dangerous that the COVID-19 pandemic, since the latter takes the “life of any person without seeing the religion or caste”. If any communal violence takes after hate speeches like the one the accused gave, then lots of “innocent lives will be lost only on the basis of religion and without any negligence on the part of such innocent people”.
The court was also wary of the fact that if released on bail, the accused may not indulge in unconstitutional and illegal activities once again, but could also impede the investigation by threatening the complainant and other witnesses.
“At this juncture, rights of the accused of his personal liberty cannot be preferred against the right of the society in peaceful communal harmony and balance lies in favour of the later,” the magistrate said.
The counsels for the petitioner argued that at the same mahapanchayat, several other persons had also given, hate speeches, but only the petitioner has been made an accused and was arrested “as he is outsider and has no political connection”. The counsel also argued that other orators, “who are powerful persons”, gave inflammatory speeches but no action has been taken against them. This shows the biased attitude of the Haryana police against his client, the counsel argued.
While the counsel did not name any persons, it was perhaps a reference to BJP spokesperson Suraj Pal Amu, who incited residents of Pataudi against Muslims.
Magistrate Sageer said that the court was informed that police has received a complaint only against the present accused and later if evidence is found during the investigation against other persons, they would also be arrested as per law.
Kaushik Raj and Alishan Jafri, in a piece for The Wire, had reported recently that the Jamia shooter’s social media posts contain a host of hate speeches that he has made at public events. Since he was let off on bail after shooting at CAA protestors last year, he has given at least three communal speeches which incite violence against Muslims. There also posts which suggest that the shooter and his ‘group’ may have shot and/or injured several people as part of vigilante violence under the garb of ‘cow protection’.

New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Friday, July 9, asked the Uttar Pradesh government not to take action on earlier notices sent to protesters who had agitated against the Citizenship Amendment Act to recover alleged losses from public property damage caused during the protests.
The apex court also, however, said that the state can take action as per the law and in accordance with new rules.
A bench of Justices D.Y. Chandrachud and M.R. Shah said, “Don’t take action as per the earlier notices. All action should be taken in accordance with new rules.”
The government had threatened to recover alleged losses from property damage from those it had identified as culpable protesters in late 2019, during the thick of the anti-CAA protests that also saw heavy police action against agitators. The Wire had then reported how the move did not stand to legal scrutiny.
By the end of December 2019, administrations of four districts issued notices to over 130 people accused of rioting to pay up around Rs 50 lakh in damages.
Then, the Uttar Pradesh assembly in March 2021 passed a Uttar Pradesh Recovery of Damages to Public and Private Property Bill, 2021. Under the law, protesters found guilty of damaging government or private properties will face imprisonment of one year or a fine ranging from Rs 5,000 to Rs 1 lakh.
Senior additional advocate general Garima Prashad, appearing for Uttar Pradesh, said the state has proceeded since the last date of hearing and has constituted tribunals and framed all the requisite rules.
The bench asked Prasad to file a counter affidavit providing details of rules and tribunals constituted and posted the matter for further hearing after two weeks.
The top court was hearing a plea filed by Parwaiz Arif Titu seeking that notices sent to alleged protesters by district administration be quashed and asked the state to respond to it.
The plea has alleged that such notices have been sent in an “arbitrary manner” and one was given against a person who had died six years ago at the age of 94. Several others, including two people who are aged above 90, have received such notices.
On January 31 last year, the top court had issued notice to the state government and asked it to respond to the plea.
Titu had contended that these notices were based on an Allahabad high court judgement delivered in 2010 which “is in violation of the guidelines” laid down by the top court in a 2009 verdict, and re-affirmed in a 2018 order.
He submitted that the state government has appointed additional district magistrate to deal with the process of notices for recovering damages for loss of public property during protests against the CAA whereas the guidelines laid down by the apex court stipulated that retired judges should deal with the matter.
The plea has sought stay on these notices claiming they have been sent to persons who have not been booked under any penal provisions and no details of FIR or any criminal offences have been made out against them.
“The contradiction is that while the Supreme Court in 2009 put the onus of assessment of damages and recovery from the accused on high courts of every state, whereas the Allahabad High Court had issued guidelines in 2010 judgement that let the state government undertake these processes to recover damages, which has serious implications,” said the plea, filed through advocate Nilofar Khan.
“The judicial oversight/judicial security is a sort of safety mechanism against arbitrary action. This means that there is every chance that the ruling party in the state could go after its political opponents or others oppose to it to settle scores,” it said.
It also sought a direction to the Uttar Pradesh government to follow the procedure as per the 2009 and 2018 guidelines of the apex court while claiming damages to recover the losses caused to public property during such protests.
The plea sought setting up of an independent judicial inquiry to probe into the incidents which happened during the protests against the amended citizenship act and the National Register of Citizens in Uttar Pradesh, as has been done by the Karnataka High Court.
It claimed that the BJP-led Adityanath government in Uttar Pradesh is “moving ahead on the chief minister’s promise of avenging loss to public property” by seizing assets of protestors in order to “take revenge for political reasons from one community who is in minority”.
The plea further alleged that around 925 people, who have been arrested so far in connection with the violent protests, may not get bail easily in Uttar Pradesh till they pay up for the losses as they have to be given “conditional bail” only after they deposit the amount.
“The government of Uttar Pradesh and its administration and police are no longer behaving like the arm of a democratic government as it cracked down on protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019/NRC. The police on the instructions of the Uttar Pradesh administration used disproportionate force and denied public accountability,” it alleged.

Recently, a special National Investigation Agency (NIA) court refused to frame charges against the Sibasagar MLA, Akhil Gogoi, in a case filed against him under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA) for allegedly inciting violence during protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) in December 2019.
The court found no evidence to support the charge. Gogoi was thus acquitted to walk free.
(In passing, a techie from Kashmir was similarly found not guilty of charges that he was allegedly constructing a “terror module” under the same draconian UAPA by a court in Gujarat, although this unfortunate victim got his reprieve only after having served 12 years imprisonment as an undertrial inmate.)
Not to speak of what the Delhi high court had to say about the misuse of the UAPA while granting bail to three civic protesters against the same troublesome CAA.
It is to be hoped that the Supreme Court, which has now determined to go into the application, misapplication, perhaps even the desirability of the UAPA provision, will pronounce, at the least, free the lawfully protesting citizen from the chilling effect of this undemocratic and oppressive law. Especially as in many recent pronouncements, honourable judges have spoken to the matter, underscoring the mistaken or wilful misapplication of both the UAPA and the sedition law.
But what is most alarming now is what Gogoi said in an interview to NDTV. He claims that while he was in custody, the NIA sought to recruit him into the BJP/RSS, and, following his refusal, inflicted torture on him.
The news channel has wisely refrained from putting the stamp of truth on Gogoi’s startling averment for now.
But, his claim having been voiced, with no denial yet coming from the NIA, the matter is one of extreme worry and consequence for the citizen’s perception of how the state apparatus operates in the republic, and at whose call.

It stands to reason that the government of the day must set in motion an independent investigation into the charge levelled by Gogoi. If he is found to have been fibbing, he clearly must bear the burden of that act. If, on the other hand, his claim is found to be based on fact, responsibility for the allegedly tainted behaviour of the NIA will need to be fixed.
If the NIA indeed did press Gogoi in the direction he claims he was pressed, it will be foremost in the interest of the home minister to clear the air if indeed it is to be established, at least in this case, that the party and the state are not one and the same, as they are in China.
What better opportunity to distinguish ourselves from that one-party totalitarian regime?
Needless to say, investigation into the charge levelled by Gogoi is best conducted by a sitting judge either of the high courts or of the Supreme Court, in order to ensure that the proceedings thereof yield a determination that carries uncontroversial credibility.
Perhaps the Supreme Court may think it fit to go suo motu into the matter, given that the entire edifice of law enforcement is in a sense impugned by what Gogoi has said to NDTV.
At a time when questions have been raised both at home and in the democratic world abroad about the quality and content of democracy in India, NIA, a premier agency, deserves to be given the opportunity to clear itself of the allegations in question – or, if found guilty, held to account.
All those who truly worry about the institutional strength, or lack thereof, of Indian democracy, must fully take in the meaning of what the honourable chief justice of India has spoken recently in an address: that “the mere right to change rulers is no guarantee against tyranny”.
That this debate comes down to us all the way from the writings of the French philosophers, the American anti-colonial revolution and then the French revolution suggests how persistent our vigil against the dissolution of the democratic state into operative tyranny must always be.
Consider that, however degradedly and dangerously, the theoretical roots of the Second Amendment to the American Constitution (amendment incorporated in 1791) – the citizen’s right to bear arms – goes back to those histories of the struggle for liberation. (Even as, paradoxically, that right was also rooted in a fear of slave revolts in the southern states.)
Be that as it may, the public averment made by Gogoi with respect to the alleged functioning of the NIA, and, by inference, of the political dispensation that holds jurisdiction over it, is too far-reaching merely to be brushed under the carpet, or dissolved into canny gibberish on friendly media channels.

Among the many debates on the current imbroglio, there are voices which suggest that the Citizenship (Amendment) Act is somehow a lesser evil than the projected nationwide National Register of Citizens. Important allies of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party like the Janata Dal (United) seem to have taken such a position, although there have been a few voices within it who have disagreed. This sort of ameliorative position on the CAA involves, in my view, a grave misjudgement of what is intended by this seemingly compassionate act of providing citizenship to non-Muslim minorities from three Muslim-majority countries.
Whereas the scale of the consequence issuing from the CAA may well be less than alarming – barring the intent to regularise non-Muslims designated ‘illegal immigrants’ in the Assam NRC – the principle that informs its conceptualisation  is potentially lethal to the continuance of a secular republic.
Supporters of the CAA, who include some apparently well-meaning non-Hindutva Indians, argue that, after all, the implementation of the CAA will have no bearing on those who already are Indian citizens; so why the hue and cry.
Well, here’s why: In according not just refugee status (note that India is still not a signatory to the international Refugee Convention of 1951, which it indeed should be) but citizenship to individuals from designated religious communities to the exclusion of one religion, the Indian state would have for the first time adopted a non-secular principle of citizenship.

The simple point is that once admitted into India, the ostensibly persecuted would stand to become citizens not on any existing constitutional parameters but on religious considerations. Thus, whereas the disingenuous argument that no existing citizen may be affected by this new law may be true, in fact something much more heinous would have happened to the character of the state itself in subverting the secular constitution within which existing citizenship finds validity.
Some 200 million Indian citizens would have been told that their religion is somehow at the heart of the persecution that is sought to be rectified, since such new recruits to citizenship will come exclusively from three designated Islamic states. This move would then nicely gel with the Hindutva narrative that only Muslims have persecuted Indians through what the Hindutva historians dub “Muslim” rule in India. In this Jungian recourse to a manufactured collective unconscious, the record of persecutions engaged in our history by non-Muslim rulers would stand relegated to oblivion.
This insidious line of thinking is buttressed by the concomitant fact that persecuted Hindus in Sri Lanka, or persecuted Christians in Bhutan, or Madhesis in Nepal, or Rohingya in Myanmar are not a part of the CAA, suggestive of the Hindutva dogma that non-Muslim states  cannot be religious persecutors. How, perish the thought, can Buddhists in Sri Lanka and Myanmar, or fellow-Hindus in Nepal, after all, be regarded as capable of persecuting  anyone on religious grounds!
The seemingly innocuous and compassionate CAA, then, is a thin end of a wedge that seeks to demarcate one religion as a persecutor and exclude other religions from such predilections. It is thus not hard to imagine how an ideological stance of this sort would not but impact the collective psyche of Indian Muslims, whose citizenship may well not be affected by the CAA but whose self-perception would not but be severely debilitated as a class, if you like, by this misreading of history and contemporary realities.
The CAA then has the effect  of putting one isolated religion in the dog-house not just in the three designated countries but on a far larger  ambit of reference that inevitably includes Islam in India as well. Since the Hindutva forces seek pointedly to locate the CAA within a revived memory of Partition, the new law also has the potential to propagate the view that atrocities were then committed only by Muslims on non-Muslims, a position that runs patently foul of the tragic bipartisan character of that unconscionable episode in the life of the sub-continent.
Such a construction of religious communities may in time to come have a more cascading legal and cultural consequence within India than we are now allowed to contemplate.
Once the demarcation is made current, many aspects of India’s collective life may bear the fall out. A concomitant logic resides in the Hindutva argument that Ahmediyas, Shias and Hazaras cannot be considered persecuted sections because they constitute an “internal” schism within Islam, and therefore, do not qualify for external intervention. This cleverly pre-emptive move forestalls the likely argument that any other country may have any locus, for example, to consider citizenship for persecuted Dalits in India, since, like the Ahmediyas, Shias and Hazaras, Dalit issues are “internal to Hinduism” and thus outside the pall of international concern.
The CAA, then, bears the seeds of causing a disjunction both within the constitution and the social/religious plurality of India that can promise to Hindutva forces further long-term recalibrations of both the nation and the state.

The country-wide resistance to the CAA, cutting across communities, is evidence of the fact that “we the people” are wiser to the totalised meaning of the CAA legislation than its proponents profess. Indian citizens out protesting may be credited to have sensed that what seems just a snow flake is propelled by an avalanche that harbours menace for the constitutional republic.
That the government of the day is unable to answer with any humanist conviction why the new law should not include all “persecuted minorities” from all neighbouring countries gives its sectarian game away. Agonising as it does for persecuted Hindus and Christians, for example, it is unable to convince the polity about the basis on which Sri Lankan Hindus and Bhutanese Christians should not find a place within its bleeding-heart schema.
The NRC project, by contrast, as many have remarked, may have the intent of excluding Indians of a particular hue from citizenship, but will in effect be a class-based onslaught that will impact impoverished Indians across the board — a fatal exercise akin to the disastrous demonetisation one.
Also read: The Brave Women of Shaheen Bagh
As many have pointed out, if documents like the Aadhar card, voter ID etc., are also likely to be legitimised as proof of citizenship then the need for the NRC exercise is futile ab initio since some 90% of the populace is already on the record to state agencies. It is also the case that the proposed exercise may indeed never happen, since a plethora of state governments, including those friendly to the ruling party, have already made known their intent not to implement it. The more canny political purpose will of course be served in carrying on with the resolve to implement the NRC, namely to keep the vast masses embroiled in this  mortal fear of exclusion so that the real issues of livelihood and governance are side-tracked for as long as possible.
However, should the government insist on the exercise, overriding opposition, it may indeed generate chaos from which the republic may not recover for generations. And if that chaos includes seeking to use the NRC for nefarious sectarian  purposes – to exclude Muslims and regularise non-Muslims – it is again the CAA that would have enabled that project. It is, therefore, the CAA that remains a game-changing challenge to the realm; which is why the peaceful mobilisation of mass democratic resistance to its continuance remains warranted.

New Delhi: The Indian Union Muslim League (IUML) has moved the Supreme Court challenging the Centre’s notification inviting non-Muslims belonging to Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan and residing in 13 districts in Gujarat, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Haryana and Punjab to apply for Indian citizenship.
The interim application argued that the Centre is trying to circumvent the assurance given to the apex court in this regard in the pending petition filed by the IUML challenging the constitutional validity of the provisions of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA), 2019.
It said that the Centre provided assurance that staying of the Amendment Act was not necessary since the rules of the Amendment Act had not been framed.
The CAA grants Indian citizenship to non-Muslim minorities – Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi and Christian – who migrated to India from Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh till December 31, 2014, following persecution over their faith.
The fresh plea said the Union home ministry on Friday issued a notification to this effect for immediate implementation of the order under the Citizenship Act 1955 and Rules framed under the law in 2009 even though the rules under the CAA enacted in 2019 are yet to be framed by the Ministry of Home Affairs is manifestly illegal and runs counter to the provisions of the Act.

IUML in its plea before the top court said that the Centre had, during the course of the hearing of its plea challenging the constitutional validity of CAA, submitted before the apex court and provided assurance that staying of the Amendment Act was not necessary since the rules of the Amendment Act had not been framed.
“However, the respondent Union, in a roundabout way, and in an attempt to circumvent the assurance given to this court, have sought to implement their malafide designs envisaged under the Amendment Act through the recently issued order dated May 28,” the plea said.
IUML submitted that if the Centre’s notification is implemented and citizenship is given to persons on the basis of their religion, and, thereafter, if this court strikes down the Amendment Act and Rules, whereby the act of providing citizenship on the basis of religion is declared void, “Then, to take back the citizenship of these persons, granted pursuant to the present order, will be a herculean task and would be near impossible to implement. In the event the said exercise is conducted, it would render the entire batch of writ petitions (challenging CAA) as infructuous,” the plea said.
The petition has sought directions to the Centre to stay any further proceedings pursuant to the May 28 order issued by the Union of India, Ministry of Home Affairs till such time the plea challenging CAA is pending.

“In exercise of powers conferred under Section 16 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955), the central government hereby directs that powers exercisable by it for registration as citizen of India under Section 5, or for grant of certificate of naturalisation under section 6 of the Citizenship Act 1955 in respect of any person belonging to minority community in Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan namely, Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians, residing in the districts mentioned and the states mentioned below….,” the home ministry notification said
The apex court in February 2020 sought response of the Centre on a batch of fresh pleas challenging the constitutional validity of the CAA.
The top court, on December 18, 2019 had decided to examine the constitutional validity of the CAA while refusing to stay its operation.
While hearing a batch of petitions, the top court had on January 22, 2020 made it clear that the operation of CAA will not be stayed and gave the government four weeks to respond to the pleas challenging the CAA.
When the CAA was enacted in 2019, there were widespread protests in different parts of the country and even riots took place in Delhi in early 2020 in the wake of these protests.

New Delhi: A year-and-a-half after it enacted the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) that provided a fast track route to citizenship for non-Muslim communities from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan, the Centre on Friday allowed Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Parsis, Christians and Buddhists from these three countries who are residing in 13 districts of India to apply for the host country’s citizenship. However, the applications have been invited under the Citizenship Act of 1955 since the rules pertaining to the amended Act are yet to be finalised.
It may be recalled that the enactment of CAA, which was passed by parliament in December 2019 despite strong protests by the opposition, when twinned with the possible creation of a nationwide National Register of Citizens (NRC), was seen as a move which discriminated against the Muslims. There were widespread protests against these moves of the Centre.
The notification issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) read, “In exercise of powers conferred under Section 16 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955), the Central Government hereby directs that powers exercisable by it for registration as citizen of India under Section 5, or for grant of certificate of naturalisation under section 6 of the Citizenship Act 1955 in respect of any person belonging to minority community in Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan namely, Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians, residing in the districts mentioned and the states mentioned below.”
The 13 districts – Morbi, Rajkot, Patan, Vadodara, Durg, Balodabazar, Jalore, Udaipur, Pali, Barmer, Sirohi, Faridabad and Jalandhar – fall in the fives states of Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Haryana and Punjab.
Incidentally, the notification for immediate implementation of the order has been issued under the Citizenship Act 1955 and Rules framed under the law in 2009 and not under the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 since its rules have still not been framed.
Though the rules are said to be essential for the implementation of the Act, the MHA has not been able to finalise them despite deliberating on them for over a year.
According to the Indian Express, these rules are required to specify the nature of documents that would be needed to prove whether an applicant came to India from the three countries before the cut off date, December 31, 2014. “Most [undocumented immigrants] have entered the country without any travel documents,” a source told the newspaper.
Earlier in 2018, a similar notification was issued by the Centre granting similar powers to collectors and home secretaries Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi with regard to some districts.
The notification, issued on May 28, has granted the same powers to the home secretaries of Haryana and Punjab, except for Faridabad and Jalandhar.
It further said that “the application for registration as citizen of India or grant of certificate of naturalisation as citizen of India under the said rules (Citizenship Rules, 2009) shall be made by the applicant online.”
Thereafter, it said, the verification of the application would be done simultaneously by collector or secretary (home) of Haryana and Punjab as the case may be, at the district-level and the state-level. It added that “the application and the reports thereon shall be made accessible simultaneously to the Central government on online portal”.
“The collector or the secretary, as the case may be, makes such inquiry as he considers necessary for ascertaining the suitability of the applicant and for that purpose forwards the application online to such agencies for verification and comments as may be required for completing such an inquiry,” the notification said, adding, “the instructions issued by the Central Government from time-to-time in this regard shall be strictly complied with by state or union territory and district concerned.”
It further provided that the comments of the agencies would be uploaded online by them and made accessible to the collector or the secretary, as the case may be, and the Central government.
On being “satisfied with the suitability of the applicant”, the notification said, the collector or the secretary will grant the citizenship of India by registration or naturalisation and issue a certificate of registration or naturalisation”.
The notification also lays down that the collector or the secretary would “maintain an online as well as physical register, in accordance with the said rules, containing the details of the person registered or naturalised as a citizen of India and furnish a copy thereof to the central government within seven days of such registration or naturalisation.”

New Delhi: A Delhi court on Monday, April 26, observed that the Delhi Police’s senior officers have displayed a “complete lack of supervision” in investigation into several cases of the Delhi riots of February 2020.
Additional Sessions Judge Vinod Yadav also noted that the practice of clubbing several FIRs into one has been used to “protect the accused” in the violence, Indian Express has reported.
ASJ Yadav made the observations while dismissing a revision petition filed by Delhi Police against an order by a magisterial court to lodge separate FIRs on the complaint of one Nishar Ahmed.
The sessions court noted that instead of filing two FIRs, the police had clubbed Ahmed’s complaint with another plea, that was related to only a single incident that took place on February 25, 2020, without realising that his complaint disclosed the acts of two separate dates – February 24 and another of February 25.
“I do not find any substance in the present petition filed by the State. The investigating agency has evidently been found to be on the wrong side of law. This Court has found in several cases of riots in the entire length and breadth of police stations in north-east Delhi that there was complete lack of supervision of the investigation(s) by the senior police officers of the District,” ASJ Yadav noted.
He also added that remedial measures were required in the matter.

“All is not over yet. If the senior officers now look into the matter(s) and take remedial measures required in the matter(s), so that justice could be given to the victims,” the judge said.
Ahmed had had said that on February 25, 2020 a riotous mob vandalised and looted his house in Gokalpuri area and set fire to his two motorcycles parked outside.
He also claimed that the incident took place after a clarion call was given on February 24, 2020 to the persons of a particular community to vandalise and set on fire the houses of persons of another community.
Ahmad claimed that the police took down “a very small complaint regarding a theft” when, on March 18, at the Eidgah relief camp in Mustafabad, he had given a detailed account of the incident, Express reported.
The police had clubbed his complaint with an FIR that was related to the incidents that took place on February 25, 2020 without mentioning anything about February 24, 2020 incident.
“There are clear allegations by the respondent against the named police official(s) of PS Gokalpuri, who had refused to register FIR on his complaint and forced him to give merely complaint of theft (complaint dated 04.03.2020),” the court observed, according to Indian Express.
He had approached a magisterial court, which had directed the police to lodge two separate FIRs, one related to the incidents of February 24 and the another of February 25.
The police, however, approached the sessions court against the order passed by the Metropolitan Magistrate. This was rejected by ASJ Yadav on Monday.

“Even the offence of criminal conspiracy, prima facie made out in relation to February 24 incident, was not been invoked by Delhi Police in any of the cases where either the respondent is complainant or witness,” the judge noted.
He also said that he did not find “even semblance of investigation with regard to the criminal conspiracy hatched by the persons named in complaint dated 18.03.2020” either by investigating officer or by the Special Cell.
The judge also observed that there has been “clear diversions of action/investigation by the police” in a case where “the persons who participated at the protest site in the capacity of organisers have been made accused persons.” The protest ostensibly refers to one against the Citizenship Amendment Act. The Delhi Police has been criticised over naming anti-CAA protesters as accused in the riots repeatedly while overlooking the roles of active participants of the violence.
Express reported that the judge also noted that “in many cases, 25 complaints have been clubbed into a single FIR having different dates of incidents, different complainants, different witnesses and different set of accused persons,” in a practice that sought to “protect the accused, even if the offence is same.”
On April 7, a Delhi court had pointed out in no uncertain terms, the Delhi Police’s laxity in investigating the burning of the Madina Mosque mosque during the riots.
On March 26, ASJ Yadav had expressed dissatisfaction with Delhi Police for not having maintained files in connection with the probe into the desecration of the Masjid.

New Delhi: The Madras high court recently quashed a first information report (FIR) against one Jafar Sathick who was protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act on March 2020 in Kanyakumari, LiveLaw reported.
The special sub-inspector of police, Boothapandy police station, Kanyakumari district, in the complaint had said the protest caused hindrance to the free flow of traffic on the road. It added that the petitioners and others had committed public nuisance by their act.
The bench of Justice R. Hemalatha noted that no untoward incident had taken place and the petitioner had organised the protest and the FIR did not disclose any act of violence.

According to the report, the court said, “It must be unequivocally emphasised that the Constitution of India gives its citizens the right to freedom of speech and expression, assemble peacefully and without arms, to form Associations and Unions and to move freely throughout the Territory of India under Article 19 (1) (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the Constitution of India.”
The court added, as per the report, “In the instant case, the protest was peaceful and as already observed no untoward incident took place.”
Therefore, after making these observations, the court quashed the FIR filed against the petitioner.
In a similar case, the Madurai bench of the Madras high court in November last year had quashed an FIR lodged against two CAA-NRC (National Register of Citizens) protesters saying they had conducted peaceful demonstrations and no act of violence had occurred.

New Delhi: On the recommendation of the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR), the Patna Police have book two voluntary city groups under the charge of sedition for imparting “provocative and anti-national” lessons on the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and National Register of Citizens to street children at a Danapur residential school.
The NCPCR had carried out inspections at the Danapur residential school on February 15 and 25. The school provides space to two voluntary groups for conducting classes which are attended by around 60 girls in the six to 18 years age group.
Following its inspection of the school, the child rights body said on going through the homework copies of some of the students, it found that they had wrongly “interpreted CAA/NRC”. One of the students had while referring to the legislation enacted in December 2019, written: “I am against NRC. If I have no home, where can I keep documents.”
On going through the writings of the students, NCPCR chairperson Priyank Kanungo had written to the Patna police that on inspecting “all the relevant papers” he had come to the conclusion that “such lessons would (turn) students against (the) laws of the land”.
The Commission in its letter to Patna SSP Garima Malik on March 2 wrote that “… the team came across one ‘capacity building register’, where it was found written that ‘NRC, CAA, fund raising training’ was conducted on 20 December 2019… by KDDC… (and Umbrella Foundation)…”.
It further pointed out that lesson to students in Hindi on December 26, 2019, said: “…This (CAA/NRC) will affect mostly those living in slums as these are damaged because of floods or other reasons every year… If the Bill (CAA) being brought by the government gets passed, we all should oppose it.”

Subsequently, the Commission also wrote to the Director General of Bihar police, S.K. Singhal, seeking registration of a case against those holding the classes. Thereafter, the police registered a case against the Umbrella Foundation and KDDC at the Danapur Police Station last week. It invoked charges under Section 124A (sedition) and Section 153A (promoting enmity between different groups) of the Indian Penal Code, and under the Juvenile Justice Act.
However, as reported by the Indian Express, an officer of Danapur Police Station said that while the matter was being investigated, “no one, however, has been arrested.”
The newspaper also quoted Santosh Mahto, who is associated with the classes held at the Danapur school, as saying that he had little information regarding the two organisations – Umbrella Foundation and KDDC – which were running classes at the school. “We do not decide which organisations provide training to the street girls,” he said.
As per the development model of such school in Bihar, the state government provides the infrastructure – including the building – to the child care institutes while the functioning of the schools is funded by the civil society.
The Bihar police are now trying to get in touch with both the groups to learn about their classes.
The police have invoked the sedition charge against Sarma, even though the Supreme Court has repeatedly ruled that sedition is constituted by written or spoken words which “have the effect of bringing contempt or dissatisfaction or the idea of subverting government by violent means”. In Kedar Nath Singh v State of Bihar, the apex court said that if comments, however strongly worded, do not have the tendency to incite violence, they cannot be treated as sedition.